
8
 1Rebuilding the Economy and Creating JobsWe  are  the  party  of  a  growing  economy  that  gives everyone a chance in life, an opportunity to learn,  work,  and  realize  the  prosperity  freedom  makes possible. Government cannot create prosperity, though government can limit or destroy it. Prosperity is the product of selfdiscipline, enterprise, saving and investment by individuals, but it is not an end in itself. Prosperity  provides  the  means  by  which  citizens  and their families can maintain their independence from government, raise their children by their own values, practice their faith, and build communities of  cooperation  and  mutual  respect.  It  is  also  the  foundation for our nation’s global leadership, for it is the vigor of our economy which makes possible our military strength and our national security. Pundits and Democrats tell us that we should accept the new normal of a slowgrowing economy.   The consequences are too dire to ever accept that:  President Obama and his party will set a record of being the first modern president ever to leave office without a single calendar year of three percent economic growth. As a result, the number of  Americans  living  in  poverty  has  increased  by  7  million,  our  nation’s economy has lost nearly $8 trillion of cumulative output compared with an average recovery, and the economic growth shortfall has left a cumulative real aftertax per person personal  income  shortfall  of  nearly  $17,000  compared with an average recovery.    Under  President  Obama  and  the  Democrats,  new  privatesector  jobs  are  three  million  below  where  they  should  have  been  with  just  average  modern  postrecession  growth.    Our  labor  force  participation  rate  has  plunged  to  at  or  below  63  percent  for  far  too  long,  lows  last  seen  two  generations ago before President Reagan was elected in 1980.  Business closures have exceeded business startups throughout the Obama Presidency.  Strong growth, more jobs, increasing incomes, and expanding opportunity are all in short supply under President Obama and the Democrats.  We repudiate the absurd idea this is the best America can do. The American people rejected that nonsense the last time it was offered, in the historic election  of  1980,  and  we  ask  them  to  join  us  now  to again repudiate the false gospel of America’s diminishment and retreat. We offer instead our vision of an opportunity society based on the economics of inclusion. Fair and Simple Taxes for Growth Republicans  consider  the  establishment  of  a  progrowth tax code a moral imperative. More than any other public policy, the way government raises revenue  —  how  much,  at  what  rates,  under  what  circumstances,   from   whom,   and for whom — has the greatest  impact  on  our  economy’s  performance.  It  powerfully  influences  the  level  of  economic  growth and job creation, which translates  into  the  level  of  opportunity for those who would otherwise be left behind.  Getting  our  tax  system  right  will  be  the  most  important  factor  in  driving  the  entire  economy  back  to  prosperity. The  current  tax  code  is  rightly  the  object  of  both  anger  and  mockery.  Its  length  is  exceeded  only  by  its  complexity.  We  must  start  anew.  That  will be an enormous undertaking and, if it is to succeed, it must command the attention and approval of  the  American  people.  It  cannot  be  engineered  from the top down, but must have a common sense approach, and be simplified. Restoring the American DreamREPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016Republicans consider the establishment of a progrowth tax code a moral imperative.H H H H H
2Our proposal is straightforward. Wherever tax rates penalize thrift or discourage investment, they must  be  lowered.  Wherever  current  provisions  of  the  code  are  disincentives  for  economic  growth,  they  must  be  changed.  We  will  not  divide  the  American  people  into  winners  and  losers.  We  will  eliminate  as  many  special  interest  provisions  and  loopholes as possible and curb corporate welfare, especially where their erosion of the tax base has created pressure for higher rates. We will be mindful of the burdens on families with children and the impact on an aging population. We will seek simplicity and clarity so that every taxpayer can understand how much of their income is consumed by the federal government. We  will  welcome  all  to  this  enterprise  —  to  discuss,  debate,  challenge,  and  amend  —  so  that  together we can restore economic growth for the American people and, even more important, renew their faith in the future.  Our Tax PrinciplesTo ensure that past abuses will not be repeated, we assert these fundamental principles. We oppose retroactive taxation. We condemn attempts by activist judges at any level of government to seize the power of the purse from the people’s elected representatives by ordering higher taxes. We  oppose  tax  policies  that  deliberately  divide Americans or promote class warfare. Because of the vital role of religious organizations, charities, and fraternal benevolent societies in fostering generosity and patriotism, they should not be subject to  taxation  and  donations  to  them  should  remain  deductible. To guard against hypertaxation of the American people in any restructuring of the federal tax  system,  any  value  added  tax  or  national  sales  tax must be tied to the simultaneous repeal of the Sixteenth Amendment, which established the federal income tax.   A Competitive AmericaCompetitiveness  equals  jobs.  That  equation  governs  our  policies  regarding  U.S.  corporations  in the global economy.  Private investment is a key driver of economic growth and job creation.  After falling dramatically during the recession, private investment has recovered at a disappointing pace due in  part  to  high  corporate  tax  rates  and  increasing  regulatory burdens and uncertainty.   American  businesses  now  face  the  world’s  highest corporate tax rates. That’s like putting lead shoes on your crosscountry team. It reduces companies’  ability  to  compete  overseas,  encourages  them  to  move  abroad,  lessens  their  investment,  cripples job creation here at home, lowers American wages, and fosters the avoidance of tax liability — without actually increasing tax revenues.  A more damaging policy is hard to imagine. We propose to level the international playing field by lowering the corporate  tax  rate  to  be  on  a  par  with,  or  below,  the  rates  of  other  industrial  nations.  We  endorse  the  recommendation  of  the  National  Commission  on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, as well as the current Administration’s Export Council, to switch to  a  territorial  system  of  taxation  so  that  profits  earned  and  taxed  abroad  may  be  repatriated  for  jobcreating investment here at home.   We believe American  companies  should  be  headquartered  in  America.  We should reduce barriers to accomplishing that goal. A Winning Trade PolicyInternational  trade  is  crucial  for  all  sectors  of  America’s economy. Massive trade deficits are not.  We  envision  a  worldwide  multilateral  agreement  among nations committed to the principles of open markets, what has been called a “Reagan Economic Zone,” in which free trade will truly be fair trade for all concerned. We need better negotiated trade agreements that put America first. When trade agreements have been  carefully  negotiated  with  friendly  democracies, they have resulted in millions of new jobs here at  home  supported  by  our  exports.    When  those  agreements  do  not  adequately  protect  U.S.  interests, U.S. sovereignty, or when they are violated with impunity, they must be rejected. We cannot allow foreign governments to limit American access to their markets while stealing our designs,  patents,  brands,  knowhow,  and  technology. We cannot allow China to continue its currency manipulation, exclusion of U.S. products from government  purchases,  and  subsidization  of  Chinese  companies to thwart American imports.  The current Administration’s way of dealing with these vio• REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •
3lations of world trade standards has been a virtual surrender.Republicans understand that you can succeed in a negotiation only if you are willing to walk away from it. A Republican president will insist on parity in trade and stand ready to implement countervailing duties if other countries refuse to cooperate. At  the  same  time,  we  look  to  broaden  our  trade  agreements  with  countries  which  share  our  values  and  commitment  to  fairness,  along  with  transparency  in  our  commercial  and  business  practices. In pursuing that objective, the American people  demand  transparency,  full  disclosure,  protection  of  our  national  sovereignty,  and  tough  negotiation on the part of those who are supposed to advance the interests of U.S. workers. Significant trade   agreements   should   not   be   rushed   or   undertaken in a Lame Duck Congress.    Freeing Financial MarketsThe  Republican  vision  for  American  banking  calls for establishing transparent, efficient markets where consumers can obtain loans they need at reasonable rates based on market conditions. Unfortunately, in response to the financial institutions crisis of 20082009, the Democraticcontrolled Congress enacted the Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, otherwise known as DoddFrank. They did not let the crisis go to waste but used it as an excuse  to  establish  unprecedented  government  control over the nation’s financial markets. The consequences have been bad for everyone except federal regulators. Rather than address the cause of the crisis — the government’s own housing policies — the new law  extended  government  control  over  the  economy by creating new unaccountable bureaucracies. Predictably, central planning of our financial sector has not created jobs, it has killed them.  It has not limited risks, it has created more.  It has not encouraged economic growth, it has shackled it.Since the enactment of DoddFrank, the number of community banks has significantly declined, and  the  cost  and  complexity  of  complying  with  the law has created impediments to the remaining banks’ ability to support the customers they serve. From 13,000 community banks in 1985, only 1,900 remain.  Still, the majority of agricultural loans and small business loans are made by community banks.  From startups foregone to home loans not made, DoddFrank’s  excessive  regulation  and  burdensome requirements have helped contribute to the slow economy we all endure today under President Obama and the Democrats.  Community  banks  are  essential  to  ensuring  small  businesses  have  easy  and  affordable  access to the capital they need to grow and prosper. Community banks should be relieved of excessive regulations. We support removing roadblocks and regulations that prevent access to capital.The  worst  of  DoddFrank  is  the  Consumer  Financial Protection Bureau, deliberately designed to be a rogue agency. It answers to neither Congress nor the executive, has its own guaranteed funding outside  the  appropriations  process,  and  uses  its  slush fund to steer settlements to politically favored groups. Its Director has dictatorial powers unique in the American  Republic.  Its  regulatory  harassment  of  local and regional banks, the source of most home mortgages  and  small  business  loans,  advantages  big banks and makes it harder for Americans to buy a home. Its onesizefitsall approach to every issue threatens the diversity of the country’s financial system and would leave us with just a few enormous institutions, as in many European countries. If the Bureau is not abolished, it should be subjected to congressional appropriation. In that way, consumer protection in the financial markets can be advanced through measures that are both effective and  constitutional.  Any  settlements  arising  from  statutory violations by financial institutions must be used  to  make  whole  the  harmed  consumers,  with  any remaining proceeds given to the general Treasury.  Diversion  of  settlement  funds  to  politicallyconnected parties should be a criminal offense. Republicans believe that no financial institution is too big to fail. We support legislation to ensure that the problems of any financial institution can be resolved through the Bankruptcy Code. We endorse prudent regulation of the banking system to ensure that FDICregulated banks are properly capitalized and taxpayers are protected against bailouts.  We will end the government’s use of disparate impact theory in enforcing antidiscrimination laws with regard to lending.• REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •
4Responsible Homeownership and Rental OpportunitiesHomeownership  expands  personal  liberty,  builds  communities,  and  helps  Americans  create  wealth. “The American Dream” is not a stale slogan. It is the lived reality that expresses the aspirations of all our people. It means a decent place to live, a safe place  to  raise  kids,  a  welcoming  place  to  retire.  It  bespeaks the quiet pride of those who work hard to shelter their family and, in the process, create caring neighborhoods. The  Great  Recession  devastated  the  housing  market. U.S. taxpayers paid billions to rescue Freddie  Mac  and  Fannie  Mae,  the  latter  managed  and  controlled  by  senior  officials  from  the  Carter  and  Clinton Administrations, and to cover the losses of the  poorlymanaged  Federal  Housing  Administration.  Millions  lost  their  homes,  millions  more  lost  value in their homes. More than six million households had to move from homeownership to renting. Rental costs escalated so that today nearly 12 million families spend more than 50 percent of their incomes just on rent. The national homeownership rate has sharply fallen and  the  rate  for  minority  households  and  young  adults  has  plummeted.  So  many  remain  unemployed  or  underemployed,  and  for  the  lucky  ones  with jobs, rising rents make it harder to save for a mortgage. There is a growing sense that our national standard of living will never be as high as it was in the past.  We  understand  that  pessimism  but  do  not  share  it,  for  we  believe  that  sound  public  policies  can  restore  growth  to  our  economy,  vigor  to  the  housing market, and hope to those who are now on the margins of prosperity. Our  goal  is  to  advance  responsible  homeownership while guarding against the abuses that led  to  the  housing  collapse.  We  must  scale  back  the federal role in the housing market, promote responsibility on the part of borrowers and lenders, and avoid future taxpayer bailouts. Reforms should provide clear and prudent underwriting standards and guidelines on predatory lending and acceptable lending practices.  Compliance with regulatory standards should constitute a legal safe harbor to guard against opportunistic litigation by trial lawyers. We call for a comprehensive review of federal regulations, especially those dealing with the environment,  that  make  it  harder  and  more  costly  for  Americans to rent, buy, or sell homes. For  nine  years,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  have  been  in  conservatorship  and  the  current  Administration  and  Democrats  have  prevented  any  effort  to  reform  them.  Their  corrupt  business  model lets shareholders and executives reap huge profits  while  the  taxpayers  cover  all  loses.  The  utility of both agencies should be reconsidered as a Republican administration clears away the jumble of subsidies and controls that complicate and distort homebuying. The  Federal  Housing  Administration,  which  provides   taxpayerbacked   guarantees   in   the   mortgage market, should no longer support highincome  individuals,  and  the  public  should  not  be  financially exposed by risks taken by FHA officials. We  will  end  the  government  mandates  that  required  Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac,  and  federallyinsured banks to satisfy lending quotas to specific groups.  Discrimination should have no place in the mortgage industry. Zoning decisions have always been, and must remain, under local control. The current Administration is trying to seize control of the zoning process through  its  Affirmatively  Furthering  Fair  Housing  regulation. It threatens to undermine zoning laws in order to socially engineer every community in the country. While the federal government has a legitimate role in enforcing nondiscrimination laws, this regulation has nothing to do with proven or alleged discrimination and everything to do with hostility to the selfgovernment of citizens. America on the Move Our  country’s  investments  in  transportation  and  other  public  construction  have  traditionally  been  nonpartisan.  Everyone  agrees  on  the  need  for clean water and safe roads, rail, bridges, ports, and  airports.  President  Eisenhower  established  a  tradition of Republican leadership in this regard by championing the creation of the interstate highway system. In recent years, bipartisan cooperation led to major legislation improving the nation’s ports and waterways. Our  Republican  majority  ended  the  practice  of  earmarks,  which  often  diverted  transportation  • REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •
5spending to politically favored projects. In the current Congress, Republicans have secured the longest reauthorization of the Highway Trust Fund in a decade and are advancing a comprehensive reform of the Federal Aviation Administration to make flying easier and more secure.  The current Administration has a different approach.  It  subordinates  civil  engineering  to  social  engineering  as  it  pursues  an  exclusively  urban  vision of dense housing and government transit. Its illnamed  Livability  Initiative  is  meant  to  “coerce  people  out  of  their  cars.”  This  is  the  same  mentality  that  once  led  Congress  to  impose  by  fiat  a  single  maximum  speed  limit  for  the  entire  nation,  from Manhattan to Montana. Our 1980 Republican Platform pledged to repeal that edict. After the election of Ronald Reagan, we did. Now  we  make  the  same  pledge  regarding  the  current  problems in transportation policy. We propose to remove from the  Highway  Trust  Fund  programs  that  should  not  be  the  business of the federal government. More than a quarter of the Fund’s spending is diverted from its original purpose. One fifth of its funds are spent on mass transit, an inherently local affair that serves only a small portion of the population, concentrated in six big cities. Additional funds are used for  bikeshare  programs,  sidewalks,  recreational  trails, landscaping, and historical renovations. Other beneficiaries of highway money are ferry boats, the federal lands access program, scenic byways, and education initiatives.  These worthwhile enterprises should be funded through other sources.   We  propose  to  phase  out  the  federal  transit  program and reform provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act which can delay and drive up costs for transportation projects. We renew our call for repeal of the DavisBacon law, which limits employment and drives up construction and maintenance costs for the benefit of unions. Recognizing that, over time, additional revenue will be needed to expand the carrying capacity of roads and bridges, we  will  remove  legal  roadblocks  to  publicprivate  partnership agreements that can save the taxpayers’ money and bring outside investment to meet a community’s needs. With most of the states increasing their own funding for transportation, we oppose a further increase in the federal gas tax.  Although  unionization  has  never  been  permitted in any government agency concerned with national  security,  the  current  Administration  has  reversed  that  policy  for  the  Transportation  Security  Administration.  We  will  correct  that  mistake.  Americans understand that, with the threat of terrorism,  their  travel  may  encounter  delays,  but  unacceptably long lines at security checks can have the same impact as a collapsed bridge or washed out  highway.  TSA  employees  should always be seen as guardians of the public’s safety, not as just another part of the federal workforce.Amtrak  is  an  extremely  expensive   railroad   for   the   American taxpayers, who must subsidize every ticket. The federal  government  should  allow  private ventures to provide passenger service in the northeast corridor.  The  same  holds  true  with  regard  to  highspeed  and  intercity rail across the country.  We reaffirm our intention to end federal  support  for  boondoggles  like  California’s  highspeed train to nowhere.   Building the Future: TechnologyThe digital revolution has transformed how we work, learn, sell, shop, socialize —  in short, how we live. Technological change drives our positions with regard to STEM education, business and corporate involvement with educational certifications, workforce issues, privacy, cyber and national security, energy development, regulation, and other elements of our campaign for growth and jobs. It is why we propose to simplify the tax code, reduce corporate rates,  transition  to  a  territorial  system,  and  create  incentives for investment and innovation. We envision government at all levels as a partner  with  individuals  and  industries  in  technologi• REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •We envision government at all levels as a partner with individuals and industries in technological progress, not a meddlesome monitor.
6cal progress, not a meddlesome monitor. We want to create a business climate that rewards risk and promotes innovation, a learning system that gives Americans the skills needed to seize the opportunities of the 21st century, and an international order that  maintains  a  fair  and  open  global  market  for  America’s  goods  and  services.  We  intend  to  advance policies that protect data privacy while fostering innovation and growth and ensuring the free flow of data across borders. Together,  broadband  and  good  ideas  have  become  the  21st  century  engines  of  American  ingenuity.  Innovation,  by  its  nature,  is  disruptive.  In  challenging  legacy  forms  of  business,  innovation  creates  new  jobs,  gives  access  to  new  markets,  opens opportunity to underserved populations, and expands consumer choice. Government must give America’s innovators the freedom to create and, on their merits, succeed or fail. Our  agenda  includes  balanced  protections  for  intellectual  property,  explained  elsewhere  in  this  document.  We  intend  to  facilitate  access  to  spectrum by paving the way for highspeed, next      generation  broadband  deployment  and  competition  on  the  internet  and  for  internet  services.  We  want government to encourage the sharing economy  and  ondemand  platforms  to  compete  in  an  open market, and we believe public policies should encourage the innovation and competition that are essential for an Internet of Things to thrive. Government must keep pace with the technology deployed in the private sector. There is an urgent need to modernize the federal government’s legacy systems and to recruit the skilled technical personnel who can advance the adoption of innovation in the public sector. At the cost of billions, the current  Administration  has  done  little  to  advance  our  goal  of  universal  broadband  coverage.  That  hurts  rural  America,  where  farmers,  ranchers,  and  small business people need connectivity to operate in real time with the world’s producers. Almost ten million Americans have given up wired broadband connections in just the last two years alone, and millions more have never been connected in the first place. We  encourage  publicprivate  partnerships  to  provide  predictable  support  for  connecting  rural  areas so that every American can fully participate in the global economy.  The   publicprivate   partnerships   between   NASA, the Department of Defense, and commercial companies  have  given  us  technological  progress  that has reduced the cost of accessing space and extended  America’s  space  leadership  in  the  commercial,  civil,  and  national  security  spheres.  The  entrepreneurship and innovation culture of the free market is revitalizing the nation’s space capabilities, saving taxpayer money, and advancing technology critical to maintain America’s edge in space and in other fields. To  protect  our  national  security  interests  and  foster  innovation  and  competitiveness,  we  must  sustain  our  preeminence  in  space  by  launching  more  scientific  missions,  guaranteeing  unfettered  access, and ensuring that our spacerelated industries  remain  a  source  of  scientific  leadership  and  education.  Building the Future: America’s Electric GridOur  nation’s  interstate  electric  transmission  system has long been a catalyst for developing and delivering low cost energy while spurring economic growth  throughout  the  United  States  The  grid  is  aging, vulnerable to cyber and terrorist threats, and unprepared to serve our energy needs of tomorrow. It  should  not  take  seven  to  ten  years  to  plan  and  construct a transmission line. We support expedited siting  processes  and  the  thoughtful  expansion  of  the grid so that consumers and businesses continue to have access to affordable and reliable electricity.  Startup Century: Small Business and EntrepreneurshipA  central  reason  why  the  20th  century  came  to be called the American Century was the ability of individuals to invent and create in a land of free markets.  Back  then  they  were  called  risktakers,  dreamers,  and  small  business  owners.  Today  they  are  the  entrepreneurs,  independent  contractors,  and  small  business  men  and  women  of  our  new  economy. Their innovation drives improvement and forces longestablished institutions to adapt or fade away. Many of them are so young they remember little  if  anything  of  the  last  century  because  dy• REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •
7namic progress does not look back. As in the past, they still create most new jobs and form the commercial network that holds communities together. Their enterprise is the lifeblood of our economy, but it is weakening.More businesses are closing in our country than are starting. Older firms are an increasing proportion of companies. Productivity growth has slowed.  This is not the way to jumpstart a new era of growth. We need to consider the effect of capital gains rates on the availability of venture capital, as well as the positive impact of expensing on startup firms. We  should  reduce  the  occupational  licensing  laws that shut untold millions of potential workers out of entrepreneurial careers.  We must overturn the  regulatory  nightmare,  created  by  the  DoddFrank  law,  for  the  community  banks  and  savings  and   loans   that   provide   nearly   half   of   all   small               business loans and over threequarters of all agricultural loans. Indeed, the world of the app economy cries out for the comprehensive regulatory reform proposed elsewhere in this platform. We must challenge established interests and traditional business patterns to facilitate market entry of new business models, including inventive means of transport, delivery, and communication. As incubators of unconventional thinking, our country’s existing research infrastructure — the National Labs, the National Institutes of Health, NASA, and  elements  of  the  Defense  Department  —  have  the potential to form partnerships with small businesses to create an American StartUp Century. The Federal ReserveBecause the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy decisions  affect  job  creation,  upward  mobility  for  workers, and equitable prosperity, they should be transparent. Similarly, the Federal Reserve’s important  role  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  should  also  be  carried out in a more transparent manner. The Republican Party will advance legislation that brings transparency and accountability to the Federal Reserve, the Federal Open Market Committee, and the Federal Reserve’s dealing with foreign banks. The  first  step  is  through  an  annual  audit  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  activities.  Such  an  audit  would  need  to  be  carefully  implemented  so  that  the Federal Reserve remains insulated from political pressures and its decisions are based on sound economic principles and sound money rather than political pressures for easy money and loose credit.Determined to crush the doubledigit inflation that  was  part  of  the  Carter  Administration’s  economic  legacy,  President  Reagan,  shortly  after  his  inauguration, established a commission to consider the feasibility of a metallic basis for U.S. currency. In 2012, facing the task of cleaning up the wreckage of the current Administration’s policies, we proposed a similar commission to investigate ways to set a fixed value for the dollar. With Republican leadership, the House of Representatives  has  passed  legislation  to  set  up  just  such a commission. We recommend its enactment by the full Congress and the commission’s careful consideration of ways to secure the integrity of our currency. Workplace Freedom for a 21st Century WorkforceThe  greatest  asset  of  the  American  economy  is the hardworking American. That is why our first priority is getting people back to work by fostering the kind of growth that creates jobs. That overarching  goal  unites  all  the  sections  of  this  platform.  It  runs  through  our  commitments  on  education  and  workforce development. It underlies our approach to  welfare  reform,  regulatory  reform,  and  our  determination  to  advance  the  kind  of  trade  agreements that multiply opportunities for workers here at home.  It also impels us to challenge the anachronistic labor laws that limit workers’ freedom and lock them into the workplace rules of their greatgrandfathers.  Instead of facilitating change, the current Administration  and  its  agents  at  the  National  Labor  Relations Board are determined to reverse it. They are attacking the franchise model of business development, which is essential to the flexibility and creativity  of  the  new  economy.  They  are  wielding  provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act from the 1930s, designed to fit a manufacturing workplace, to deny flexibility to both employers and employees.  They  have  repealed  union  transparency  rules  that allowed members to discover what was being • REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •
8• REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •done with their dues. They have outlawed alternatives to unions even when they were favored by the workers.  Their  Project  Labor  Agreements  discriminate  against  the  overwhelming  majority  of  workers  by  barring  them  from  jobs  on  taxpayerfunded  projects.  Their  patronizing  and  controlling  approach  leaves workers in a form of peonage to the NLRB. We intend to restore fairness and common sense to that agency. Technology  has  already  created  jobs  that  did  not  exist  fifteen  years  ago,  and  today’s  workers  need flexibility and familyfriendly options to make the most of them, especially portability in pension plans and health insurance. We intend to encourage those trends by bringing  labor  law  into  the  21st  century.  It  should  encourage  cooperation  between  management  and  workers,  not  conflict.  All  workers,  including  union  members,  must  be  free  to  accept  raises  and  rewards without veto power from union officials. All unionized workers should be able to find out what is  going  on  in  their  union  trust  funds  and  in  their  executive  compensation.  We  support  the  right  of  states  to  enact  RighttoWork  laws  and  call  for  a  national law to protect the economic liberty of the modern workforce.All Americans deserve the opportunity to pursue their American dream free from discrimination.  Clear nondiscrimination policies ensure all employees  have  the  chance  to  succeed  based  solely  on  their merits. These policies are vital to creating an inclusive, innovative, and competitive workforce. Republicans    believe    that    the    employer             employee  relationship  of  the  future  will  be  built  upon  employee  empowerment  and  workplace  flexibility.  We  therefore  endorse  employee  stock  ownership  plans  that  enable  workers  to  become  capitalists,  expand  the  realm  of  private  property,  and energize a free enterprise economy.   Minimum wage is an issue that should be handled at the state and local level.A Federal Workforce Serving the PeopleThe federal workforce is larger and more highly paid than ever. The taxpayers spend an average of $35,000 a year per employee on noncash benefits, triple  the  average  noncash  compensation  of  the  average  worker  in  the  private  sector.  Federal  employees receive extraordinary pension benefits and vacation  time  wildly  out  of  line  with  those  of  the  private sector. We urge Congress to bring federal compensation and benefits in line with the standards of most American employees. A Republican administration should streamline personnel procedures to expedite the firing of bad workers, tax cheats, and scammers. The unionization of the federal workforce, first permitted by Democrat presidents in the 1960s, should be reviewed by the appropriate congressional committees to examine its effects on the cost, quality, and performance of the civil service. Union representatives  in  the  federal  workforce  should  not  be  paid to conduct union business on the public’s time.Reducing the Federal DebtOur national debt is a burden on our economy and  families.    The  huge  increase  in  the  national  debt demanded by and incurred during the current Administration has placed a significant burden on future generations. We must impose firm caps on future debt, accelerate the repayment of the trillions we now owe in order to reaffirm our principles of responsible  and  limited  government,  and  remove  the burdens we are placing on future generations.  A strong economy is one key to debt reduction, but  spending  restraint  is  a  necessary  component  that must be vigorously pursued.
9We the PeopleWe  are  the  party  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence and the Constitution. The Declaration sets  forth  the  fundamental  precepts  of  American  government: That God bestows certain inalienable rights  on  every  individual,  thus  producing  human  equality; that government exists first and foremost to protect those inalienable rights; that manmade law  must  be  consistent  with  Godgiven,  natural  rights;  and  that  if  Godgiven,  natural,  inalienable  rights  come  in  conflict  with  government,  court,  or  humangranted  rights,  Godgiven,  natural,  inalienable  rights  always  prevail;  that  there  is  a  moral law recognized as “the Laws of Nature and of  Nature’s  God”;  and  that  American  government  is to operate with the consent of the governed. We are also the party of the Constitution, the greatest political  document  ever  written.  It  is  the  solemn  compact  built  upon  principles  of  the  Declaration  that enshrines our Godgiven individual rights and ensures that all Americans stand equal before the law, defines the purposes and limits of government, and is the blueprint for ordered liberty that makes the  United  States  the  world’s  freest  and  most  prosperous nation.  We  reaffirm  the  Constitution’s  fundamental  principles:  limited  government,  separation  of  powers,  individual  liberty,  and  the  rule  of  law.  We  denounce  bigotry,  racism,  antiSemitism,  ethnic  prejudice, and religious intolerance. Therefore, we oppose discrimination based on race, sex, religion, creed,  disability,  or  national  origin  and  support  statutes  to  end  such  discrimination.  As  the  Party  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  we  must  continue  to  foster  solutions  to  America’s  difficult  challenges  when  it  comes  to  race  relations  today.    We  continue  to  encourage  equality  for  all  citizens  and  access  to  the American Dream.  Merit and hard work should determine advancement in our society, so we reject unfair preferences, quotas, and setasides as forms of  discrimination.    Our  ranks  include  Americans  from every faith and tradition, and we respect the right of each American to follow his or her deeply held beliefs.Our  Constitution  is  in  crisis.  More  than  90  percent of federal requirements are now imposed by  regulatory  agencies,  without  any  vote  of  the  House  or  Senate  or  signature  of  the  President.  The  current  Administration  has  exceeded  its  constitutional  authority,  brazenly  and  flagrantly  violated the separation of powers, sought to divide America into groups and turn citizen against citizen. The President has refused to defend or enforce laws he  does  not  like,  used  executive  orders  to  enact  national policies in areas constitutionally reserved solely to Congress, made unconstitutional “recess” appointments   to   Senateconfirmed   positions,   directed  regulatory  agencies  to  overstep  their  statutory authority, and failed to consult Congress regarding military action overseas. He has changed what John Adams called “a government of laws and not of men” into just the opposite.Democrats   in   Congress   have   enabled,   supported, and defended each of these breaches. They  have  applauded  the  President’s  efforts  to  do  an  endrun  around  Congress  and  stymied  Republican efforts to restrain executive lawlessness. Democrats in Congress have also endorsed an anticonstitutional  agenda  of  their  own.  Fortyeight  Democratic senators, for instance, voted to amend the Bill of Rights to give government officials control over political speech. Democrats in Congress have likewise  proposed  bills  that  would  limit  religious  liberty,  undermine  property  rights,  and  eviscerate  the Second Amendment.In a free society, the primary role of government is  to  protect  the  Godgiven,  inalienable  rights  of  its  citizens.  These  constitutional  rights  are  not  negotiable  for  any  American.  We  affirm  that  all  legislation,  regulation,  and  official  actions  must  • REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •A Rebirth of Constitutional Government H H H H H
10conform to the Constitution’s original meaning as understood at the time the language was adopted. Our  most  urgent  task  as  a  Party  is  to  restore  the American people’s faith in their government by electing a president who will enforce duly enacted laws,  honor  constitutional  limits  on  executive  authority, and return credibility to the Oval Office. We  need  a  Republican  president  who  will  end  abuses  of  power  by  departments  and  agencies,  like the IRS and the EPA, and by the White House itself. Safeguarding our liberties requires a president who  will  respect  the  Constitution’s  separation  of  powers, including the authority of Congress to write legislation and define agency authority. Americans also  deserve  a  president  who  will  speak  for  our  nation’s history and values, not apologize for them to our enemies.The JudiciaryThe rule of law is the foundation of our Republic. A critical threat to our country’s constitutional order is an activist judiciary that usurps powers properly reserved  to  the  people  through  other  branches  of  government.  Only  a  Republican  president  will  appoint  judges  who  respect  the  rule  of  law  expressed within the Constitution and Declaration of  Independence,  including  the  inalienable  right  to life and the laws of nature and nature’s God, as did the late Justice Antonin Scalia. We are facing a national crisis in our judiciary.  We understand that only by electing a Republican president in 2016 will America  have  the  opportunity  for  up  to  five  new  constitutionallyminded  Supreme  Court  justices  appointed to fill vacancies on the Court. Only such appointments will enable courts to begin to reverse the  long  line  of  activist  decisions  —  including  Roe, Obergefell, and the Obamacare cases — that have  usurped  Congress’s  and  states’  lawmaking  authority,  undermined  constitutional  protections,  expanded the power of the judiciary at the expense of  the  people  and  their  elected  representatives,  and stripped the people of their power to govern themselves. We believe in the constitutional checks and balances and that the Founders intended the judiciary to be the weakest branch. We encourage Congress  to  use  the  check  of  impeachment  for  judges  who  unconstitutionally  usurp  Article  I  powers.  In  tandem  with  a  Republican  Senate,  a  new Republican president will restore to the Court a strong conservative majority that will follow the text and original meaning of the Constitution and our laws. The  legitimate  powers  of  government  are  rooted  in  the  consent  of  the  American  people.  Judicial  activism  that  includes  reliance  on  foreign  law  or  unratified  treaties  undermines  American  sovereignty.  Foreign  laws  and  precedents  should  not  be  used  to  interpret  our  Constitution  or  laws,  nor should foreign sources of law be used in state courts’ adjudication of criminal or civil matters. We  also  affirm  the  wisdom  of  President  George  Washington’s  warning  to  avoid  foreign  entanglements  and  unnecessary  alliances.  We  therefore  oppose  the  adoption  or  ratification  of  treaties  that  would  weaken  or  encroach  upon  American  sovereignty  or  that  could  be  construed  by courts to do so. We will not recognize as binding upon  the  United  States  any  international  agreement forged without the constitutionally required assent of twothirds of the United States Senate.Administrative LawArticle  I  of  the  Constitution  directs  that  “All  legislative  Powers  herein  granted  shall  be  vested  in  a  Congress  of  the  United  States....”    For  more  than  a  century,  however,  Congress  has  delegated  increasing  amounts  of  legislative  authority  to  executive departments, agencies, and commissions, laying the foundation for today’s vast administrative state.  Unelected  bureaucrats  in  the  executive  branch now write countless rules with the force of law and arbitrarily punish individuals who disobey those rules. The Constitution makes clear that these powers  were  granted  to  Congress  by  the  people  and must therefore remain solely with the people’s elected  representatives.  We  call  on  Congress  to  begin  reclaiming  its  constitutional  powers  from  the bureaucratic state by requiring that major new federal regulations be approved by Congress before they can take effect, such as through the Regulation Freedom Amendment. We further affirm that courts should interpret laws as written by Congress rather than  allowing  executive  agencies  to  rewrite  those  laws to suit administration priorities. • REPUBLICANPLATFORM 2016 •
